Foresight Technical Report

<span style="color: blue;">Draft (incomplete)</span>



<img src="media/Initiative%20-%20Foresight-02.png" title="" alt="" width="651">

# OIMS Tool-box: user guide version 1.0.0

Gideon Kruseman

November 2023

![](media/hero.png)

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
**Gideon Kruseman, WP3 leader Foresight Initiative**   |  <g.kruseman@cgiar.org>


  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

# Contents

[Introduction](#introduction)

[Context and background](#context-and-background)

  [*Background*](#context-and-background_background)



  [*Metadata*](#context-and-background_metadata)

  [*Metadata schema design principles*](#context-and-background_metadata-svhema-design-principles)

[OIMS basics](#oims-basics)

  [*Nested metadata*](#oims-basics_nested-metadata)

  [*Nested entities*](#oims-basics_nested-entities)

  [*OIMS structure*](#oims-basics_oims-structure)

  [*OIMS basic self-describing metadata schema*](#oims-basic-self-describing-metadata-schema)

[OIMS tool-box for basic users](#oims-tool-box-for-basic-users)

  [*Tool name*](#oims-toolbox-for-basic-users_toolname)

[OIMS tool-box for data managers](#oims-tool-box-for-data-managers)

  [*Tool name*](#oims-toolbox-for-datamanagers_toolname)

[OIMS tool-box for developers](#oims-tool-box-for-developers)

  [*Tool name*](#oims-toolbox-for-developers_toolname)

[Next steps](#next-steps)

  [*Required critical updates of existing tools*](#next-steps_required-critical-updates)

  [*High priority new tools*](#high-priority-new-tools)

  [*Expected non-critical updates of existing tools*](#expected-non-critical-updates-existing-tools)

  [*Expected new tools*](#expected-new-tools)

[Closing remarks](#closing-remarks)

[References](#references)

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# Introduction

The flexible, extensible machine-readable and human-intelligible Open
Ontology-agnostic Interoperable Metadata Schema (OIMS) approach is a
powerful light weight approach to tagging digital assets such as data
and metrics, models and tools and documents and publications with rich
interoperable metadata.

Central to open data in agriculture are the FAIR data principles,
emphasizing that data should be Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
Reusable. For agricultural data, this means using machine-readable
metadata and unique identifiers like DOIs for easy location and
reference. The metadata should be detailed, describing attributes like
geospatial coordinates and crop types to improve discoverability.

Access to agricultural data should be clear, considering the sensitivity
of some datasets. Data should be retrievable by identifiers via a
standardized, open communication protocol, and interoperable with
various applications and workflows. Interoperability in agriculture
fosters collaboration, integrating diverse datasets for comprehensive
insights into agricultural challenges.

To support interoperability, data and metadata should use formal,
accessible, shared languages for knowledge representation. Reusable data
should have rich metadata for replication or combination in different
settings. Interoperability empowers various stakeholders by providing
access to diverse data sources, enabling informed decision-making and
insights for precision agriculture, resource management, and sustainable
practices.

Interoperable data also supports effective policymaking and governance
in agriculture. Policymakers can access standardized data from various
sources for evidence-based decisions, enhancing transparency and
accountability. However, challenges in standardizing metadata, data
formats, and exchange protocols need addressing, along with data quality
and privacy considerations. Interoperability is crucial in open science
and open data in agriculture. It supports seamless data exchange and
integration, fostering collaboration, evidence-based decision-making,
and agricultural innovation. Embracing interoperability will lead to
transformative advancements in agriculture and contribute to global food
security.

Interoperability presents a unique challenge due to the heterogeneity of
agricultural data. A concerted effort to standardize metadata and data
formats is essential, supported by formal ontologies tailored to
agriculture and food systems. This facilitates the integration and
analysis of data from disparate sources, enabling comprehensive insights
into agricultural systems. Reusability extends the life and value of
data, allowing for replication and application in diverse contexts. Rich
metadata, including methodological details, ensures that datasets can
stand the test of time and technological advancement.

In 2017, the CGIAR Platform for Big Data in Agriculture\'s community of
practice on socio-economic data initiated a strategic approach to
enhance the FAIRness of socio-economic data. Despite the challenges of
standardizing diverse datasets, strides have been made through the
development of ontologies and metadata schemas like OIMS that cater to
the structured, unstructured, and semi-structured nature of agricultural
data. Through close collaboration with data managers in other scientific
domains a metadata approach to enhance data interoperability was
developed that can cater to all fields.

The high variety and variability in data necessitates a flexible
approach to standardization, particularly for metadata. While tools like
DataVerse and the CG-Core metadata schema have made strides in
standardizing descriptive metadata, the reality is that many datasets
are bound by pre-existing data dictionaries and ETL (Extract, Transform,
Load) processes that resist alteration. Here, the role of Open
Ontology-Based Interoperable Information Asset Metadata Schema (OIMS)
(Kruseman, 2022), with its machine-readable and human-intelligible
design that does not hinge on a single ontology, nor is bound by
pre-existing structures becomes critical. This manuscript aims to
present the latest iteration of OIMS, assess its consistency and
readiness for implementation, and evaluate its effectiveness in managing
agricultural data. By addressing these aspects, we aim to underscore the
potential of OIMS in enhancing data interoperability and contributing to
the overarching goals of open science in agriculture.

The purpose of this document is to guide the use of OIMS and its tools.
It outlines the philosophy of OIMS, available tools, and their
rationale, referencing specific user guides and technical documentation.
It also discusses further development of the OIMS toolbox, categorizing
updates and new tool development into critical, should-have, and
nice-to-have.

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# Context and background

This Chapter provides some background and context that lead to the
development of OIMS.

\[\[to do\]\]


<a id="context-and-background_background"></a>

## Background

\[\[ to do\]\]

Figure 1: to do


<a id="context-and-background_metadata"></a>

## Metadata

\[\[to do\]\]

### Descriptive metadata

\[\[to do\]\].

\[\[add more\]\]

## Metadata schema design principles

\[\[to do\]\].

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# OIMS basics

This Chapter provides a brief overview of OIMS.


<a id="oims-basics_nested-metadata"></a>

## Nested metadata

\[\[ to do\]\]


<a id="oims-basics_nested-entities"></a>

## Nested entities

\[\[ to do\]\]


<a id="oims-basics_oims-structure"></a>

## OIMS structure

\[\[ to do\]\]


<a id="oims-basics_oims-basic-selfdescribing-metadata"></a>

## OIMS basic self-describing metadata schema

\[\[ to do\]\]

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# OIMS tool-box for basic users

This Chapter provides an overview of the tools available to principle
investigators and other providers and users of data and metadata.


<a id="oims-toolbox-for-basic-users_toolname"></a>

## Tool name

\[\[ to do brief description of the tool\]\]

### Version and history

\[\[ to do\]\]

### Further reading and useful links

\[\[ to do user guide link\]\]

### Information for developers

\[\[ to do technical documentation link\]\]

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# OIMS tool-box for data managers

This Chapter provides an overview of the tools available to managers of
data and metadata. They should be well-aware of the tools available to
basic users of OIMS. In this Chapter we dive into some of the tools
available to work with existing metadata templates and schemas to
convert them into OIMS compatible metadata.


<a id="oims-toolbox-for-datamanagers_toolname"></a>

## Tool name

\[\[ to do brief description of the tool\]\]

### Version and history

\[\[ to do\]\]

### Further reading and useful links

\[\[ to do suer guide link\]\]

### Information for developers

\[\[ to do technical documentation link\]\]

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# OIMS tool-box for developers

This Chapter provides an overview of the tools available developers
building tools with or for OIMS. In principle, OIMS is a community-based
project with all tools freely available as open-source software on the
GitHub repository of the Foresight Initiative.

In the preceding Chapters with each of the tools some key information
was provided that is pertinent for developers. In this Chapter we
concentrate on the tools that have not been mentioned in the previous
Chapters.


<a id="oims-toolbox-for-developers_toolname"></a>

## Tool name

\[\[ to do brief description of the tool\]\]

### Version and history

\[\[ to do\]\]

### Further reading and useful links for developers

\[\[ to do technical documentation link\]\]



<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# Next steps

This Chapter provides an overview the next steps that are foreseen
regarding the development of OIMS.


<a id="next-steps_required-critical-updates"></a>

## Required critical updates of existing tools

### Toolname

Brief outline of required update

Expected timeline.


<a id="next-steps_high-priority-new-tools"></a>

## High priority new tools

### Toolname

Brief outline of new tool

Expected timeline.


<a id="next-steps_expected-noncritical-updates"></a>

## Expected non-critical updates of existing tools

### Toolname

Priority Status : should have or nice to have update

Brief outline of required update

Expected timeline.


<a id="next-steps_expected-new-tools"></a>

## Expected new tools

### Toolname

Priority Status : should have or nice to have new tool

Brief outline of required update

Expected timeline.

# Closing remarks

# References

Kruseman 2022

Wilkinson 2016

<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

 CGIAR is a global research partnership for a food-secure future. CGIAR
 science is dedicated to transforming food, land, and water systems in a
 climate crisis. Its research is carried out by 13 CGIAR  Centers/
 Alliances in close collaboration with hundreds of partners, including
 national and regional research institutes, civil society organizations,
 academia, development organizations and the private sector.
 www.cgiar.org

 We would like to thank all funders who support this research through
 their contributions to the CGIAR Trust Fund: [www.cgiar.org/funders](http://www.cgiar.org/funders).

 To learn more about this Initiative, please visit [this webpage](https://www.cgiar.org/initiative/foresight/).

 To learn more about this and other Initiatives in the CGIAR Research
 Portfolio, please visit [www.cgiar.org/cgiar-portfolio](http://www.cgiar.org/cgiar-portfolio)

 Â© 2023 CGIAR System Organization. Some rights reserved.

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial
 4.0 International Licence (CC BYNC 4.0).

<img src="media/Initiative%20-%20Foresight-02.png" title="" alt="" width="651">
